Yeah.
Yeah, absolutely.
Cutting up.
Feel free.
I think the software's impressive. I don't know what thing you're thinking about.
Oh, cheers, Colby. Conference.
That's gotta be nice once we get-
Someone go have
a seat over there. And it's got this weird thing too. Interesting.
Oh, yeah. Could you ?
Where?
Oh, yeah.
Ah, thank you, Suzanne. It's
Oh, good.
It's so good.
Yeah.
That's
a no? Thank you, everyone. So we resume, uh, BI Annual Review, and this is
from part five. Uh, you settled?
Thank you.
You need time to settle down? You're good?
Just getting some water
(laughs)
Okay.
Here.
Okay. Uh, Scott Bullas.
Mm.
Thank you. So look, I just want to return to the
Healthy Home Standards
and the compliance team that you've got in operation
doing, doing compliance-
(laughs)
. ... uh, in the Deep South, but not just in the Deep South.
Um, one thing that has emerged from the
wider sector is that there are already a group of
people, or a cohort of people, who are doing Healthy Home Standard
assessments or, um, or home performance
advisory services.
Mm-hmm.
So, um, thinking about how to make best use of ensuring
compliance and to check the quality of
our homes for well-being purposes,
has, has MBIE given consideration to contracting out
some of that service to those people who are already practicing,
essentially practicing that? Um,
and have you given any thought to how that
might, how that might work? I do know that there's been some
approaches to government by, like Community
Energy Network, for example, who work, manage a hub, a, a range
of hubs around the country.
Mm-hmm. Um, I can't say that we have given any detailed consideration around
changing how we do our compliance activities in terms of that
space. Um, we are always looking
at, is the way that we're delivering service or the way that we're delivering-
Mm-hmm.
... um, outcomes the best way for us to do that?
But I can't say that we have done that in detail.
I don't think that we have. Have we, Andrew?
No.
I, I... Just one very quick follow-up.
So I do recall, I think it was about three years ago, there was the Energy Hardship
Conference here in Wellington. That's changed
now. This year it was the Energy Affordability and Resilience Con-
(laughs)
... Conference because maybe there's no more hardship.
Um, but, um, but at that we did hear
from MBIE that there was a, from the representative of MBIE that there
was a, a, um, a need for better
compliance, particularly in the South.
And as we, as you, as you have explained already that, that, that work
is happening. But
I guess
if it, if it hasn't progressed beyond that, do you think you could, will be
capable of doing all of that with- in-house?
If it's just a... 'Cause I understood at the time that there was consideration
of other ways of making that work.
Mm-hmm. Uh, it's not something that we're
presently considering. The,
um, uh... I, I
think before we would feel comfortable doing that, we'd need to have some
assurance that there's some standards that those types
of, um, assessors would follow, uh, which
would be a policy-type question which Ministry of Housing
and Urban Development would consider.
And I think they have previously considered that and chosen not to
progress it. Um, as Suzanne said, we're always
looking at how we can become more efficient and
productive with our resources, and more, uh, ef-
effective as well. Um, a- and,
uh, we do that in a range of ways. We, as I mentioned
earlier, we are really hot on using good data to
understand where the highest harm is.
We have, over this past, um, or the previous
financial year,
uh, managed to s- sustain our target of 3,000
interventions. Just shy of 2,000 of
those were done, uh, where we found w- w- were
related to Healthy Home Standards matters, which is
100% uptick on the previous year. So
we're constantly, um, adjusting where our focus is
and, and helping our team prioritize where to put their effort so that it is
directed to the, um, the, the harm that's happening in the market.
(coughs)
So one of the things we do is we measure, uh, what we call the breach
rate-
Mm-hmm.
... of when we go in and, and visit and, you know, do a compliance
visit. And that's an indication of how well our intelligence is working and our
data is working, so that when we're sending our compliance officers, um,
to locations that we're actually targeting them in the right places at the right
time.And what we're seeing is improvements in that as we utilize the data and
insights that we have, um, to then enable us to
go, yes, we're putting our resources not just blanket across, but actually where we
know we can actually make the biggest difference.
So I think that's one of the things, um, how we measure that we're doing it
well.
Okay. And one very small one. There seem to be always one little extra
one.
(laughs)
Um, the, um,
the Energy Wellbeing Evaluation Network was
established, um, I don't remember how many years
ago, but MBIE was involved in that.
And I know that it, it has been really run out of the NGO sector
without any government support, but, um, has been able
to collate data.
Mm-hmm.
And if we're thinking about how we solve this challenge of energy
hardship, understanding
having the data, being able to evaluate is a really critical part.
Mm-hmm.
Are you still involved with the Energy Wellbeing Evaluation
Consortium? That's the term. Consortium.
And, and, uh, and is this something that
if you're not, or if you're not aware, is it something that wou- you'd be more
interested in, in participating in?
In assisting potentially to become more robust
(inaudible)
Yeah, I, um, I am aware that we have in the past been quite connected in with
that group, and, um, understand we are still
connected. It, um, but I would welcome the opportunity if
that's a, a good, um,
avenue for us to be able to, uh, use information
to make sure we're putting our, um, people,
uh, directed to the right areas. Um, that kind of data
exchange would be really helpful.
Uh, so certainly when I get back to the office, ask the team to
connect in again with the, with that
consortium.
I'll just-
Yeah. ... make one final-
Yeah.
... final, um-
I guess it's a question, but I am aware that the Wellbeing
Evaluation Consortium has struggled because it hasn't had any
secretariat funding.
Mm-hmm.
Previously, that had been funded out of
ECA
and then a staff member moved over to MBIE, um, so it was
in-kind re- resourcing, but that in-kind resourcing fell off
and it's being held up by the community sector, which is
already under incredible strain.
Do you think that there is a place here for government agency
to chip in and to, to, to ensure that there is
that resource? I think there's a value in it being inde- independent outside
of government, but-
(coughs)
... there's a, there's a, there's a, um, a value in, in that data
collection.
So, so we work with a number of NGOs and
non-government agencies, um, through our market
teams, whether it be in housing or in other areas.
So that could be one of the ones that we look at, but where we get the best data,
uh, for us, it's always around-
(coughs)
... best value that we get for the funds that we have that make the
biggest o-
Okay.
... impact and outcomes for, um, New Zealanders.
So absolutely, we, we can always have a look at that in the mix of all the others
that we work with.
(laughs)
All right. So, Arena Williams.
Thank you. Um-
Yeah.
... just wanna bring you to the building and construction sector work that MBIE,
um, facilitates in thinking about government
(inaudible)
(laughs)
... um, and pretty extraordinary industry downturn.
20,000 construction sector job losses and I think today the
statistic is 25% down for residential builds
compared to last, uh, this, this time in 2022.
Um, so my question is really around, is this the right time for this
reform? Um, MBIE has a lot on with the sector, um,
a number of consultations, and it might make sense to make changes
on the supply side at some point to address, um,
what's going on in the construction sector. But is it now?
Um, what, what feedback are you having from industry at the moment when
they're, um, really crying out for government support, being asked, um, again
and again about regulatory reform?
Do you want to go Paul?
Thanks.
Yeah. I know you love to talk about (inaudible) (laughs)
Well, tha- thanks. Good afternoon.
Um,
you're right that the, the sector's going through a, a, a challenging time now,
right now, and a bit of a downturn. Um, although what we are seeing is that we
are essentially returning to pre-COVID levels.
So we saw a really g- uh, a, a spike in construction
activity, uh, post COVID, uh, when there was a period people weren't
doing... weren't traveling or doing other things.
Uh, we, um, are returning to more of a long run average
in terms of the construction sector.
The unfortunate nature of the construction sector is it does tend to operate in a,
a little bit of a boom and bust cycle.
Uh, and we'd dearly love that to, to, to smooth out and to flatten out 'cause I
don't think it works for, for anyone. It doesn't work for the industry.
It doesn't work for those seeking to, to have construction undertaken.
Um, on reform, um, I think the challenge is
that there's never a great time to change things, uh,
but there are always needs to have them changed.
The feedback we've received from the sector so far, and alwa- it's always gonna be
slightly mixed, is that, uh, we've done quite a lot of consultation
around the changes, and as you know, you've been involved through the committee
being very broad based and there's quite a high degree of support
for them, albeit that it's a lot of change going through.
So some of the things we're trying to do, for example, in the building product
space, is to make it easier to, uh, address a ra- a
large number of, of products from overseas.
Uh, and I was going through, uh, this week just looking at the number of standards
that we've approved. So we're not just making it up.
We're approving international standards.
Uh, similarly, um, things like the granny flats, which will make it easier and
basically just stripping out some of the regulatory, uh, burden where it's not
necessary. So there's always a, a quite a careful balance to be made about, you
know, do you need it? Do you need it s- uh, to, for protection and for safety, et
cetera? Or is it actually just having a, you know, uh, regulatory systems
that treat over time and you end up with rules that might have made sense at the
time, but layered one over the top of each other don't...Um, and I think the
next one will be... and this will probably be a really, you know, a, in many ways,
a more substantive change, is the change to liability, uh-
Mm-hmm.
... regimes. Um, so that's not going to take place overnight, and that'll take
place over a couple of years. Um, so, um, I appreciate the point
that you're making around just the, the challenges for the sector at the moment.
But I, but I do think that actually pushing through...
'Cause some of these ideas have been around for a long time, and for, for a decade,
and haven't actually g- got progressed.
So, I think it is probably right to push through.
I think th- that's really the question is, um, I think, uh,
what, what you've said is w- what one would assume, that if these regulatory
changes were making a difference for the sector, then th- that return to
pre-COVID levels is what we'd see.
But, um, Westpac has today published its, um,
impressions of the building sector, further signs the home building-
Mm-hmm.
... cycle has found the floor. Um, and they found, um,
that the level of residential building activity remains around 25% lower than at
its peak. Um, so it would suggest to me that at this time,
where we've got these regulatory refor- reforms underway, that, as you say, things
should be getting easier for the sector. They should be building granny flats.
They should be out there bringing in more cheaper and more
affordable product. In fact, um, we're still seeing a
lag. So, what is MBIE doing to, um, make sure
that, like the UK's house building sector lagged behind (audio cuts out) by
six years, that New Zealand won't be in the same situation?
So, I think some of the other... Th- th- this does go to the nature of the cyc-
well, supply and demand aspects for, for, for residential homes in particular.
And I think there's been some other commentary, uh, of course, last week from, it
might have been Westpac, don't quote me on that.
(laughs)
Which was reflecting upon, uh, why residential prices were
still relatively low, you know, far down from the peak.
Uh, and they were saying, well, actually, a couple of reasons for that.
Uh, firstly, there had been such a, a, a peak in, in
supply, and, uh, the comment you made is from the peak, and that
post-COVID peak was, was really high.
Uh, which meant that there were a lot more houses built.
Uh, that combined with, uh, low interest rates, uh, and just
concerns, it means that people are being quite cautious.
So, what we're not seeing at the moment is an under-supply of housing.
Mm-hmm.
Uh, we're seeing actually that there's, there's maybe not quite an equilibrium.
But there's a bit more housing than we have had for many years.
That's a good thing.
Mm-hmm.
Uh, but it does mean that the, the building cycle will kind of lag a bit
as that cycle of supply and demand, uh, is matched.
So, I still think that we, you know, the, if you look at the figures, and I
think it was about, we're about 2017, 2018 levels of
consents, going back to that. It really did peak in '21,
'22. Uh, and that was probably an unsustainable level.
And what you saw when that was happening was really high levels of, uh, price
inflation, uh, in the building construction sector, uh, and labor
supply, uh, challenges, and you couldn't get things built.
Mm-hmm.
So, that kind of heat in the market's not good-
... either.
Okay. A supplementary for Suzanne.
Uh, thank you. Um, just, um, in regards to the building and construction sector,
the government's got a, um, a broad work plan in this area with,
um,
changes, uh, not only to products, um, coming in, but
also consenting arrangements. Um, is MBIE keeping up with all
of those changes, and, um, within your teams, and then also
how are you measuring your own, um,
impact within the system?
Um,
MBIE... (laughs)
We're running to keep up. It's a, it's a, it's a really...
It's a comprehensive reform program.
Yeah.
Mm-hmm.
Um, and, you know, with... I mean, I've got to say, I'm super proud of the teams
and the work they've done. Uh, if I could do a, a slight skite, uh, they
did win the, uh, the Spirit of Service Award for Public Policy this year and the
Prime Minister's Award for, for Spirit of Service to Government-
... which is, which is great. Really reflected the work they had done.
Um, I think we've... Uh, my observation is, uh,
that they've done a really good job of keeping...
A- and actually keeping up with the policy and providing the kind of advice you
want the public service to provide-
Mm-hmm.
... free and frank advice from cost, benefit, risks, challenges.
And that, that's a good thing.
Mm-hmm.
Uh, ministers will sometimes agree and sometimes take different views.
That's their job as well.
Mm-hmm.
Um, and I think, you know, that the work program they delivered has been great.
And I think will be very impactful for New Zealand.
So that, that's a, that's a great thing.
Um, in terms of that impact though, uh, given the nature of these reforms are
really substantive, some of those impacts will take some time, some time to come
through.
Mm-hmm.
Some of the things that you're seeing, like the simple things around granny flats-
... you'd expect that to happen relatively quickly.
Uh, things like proportionate liability will fundamentally change the, the
risk p- uh, uh, profile for the sector.
And our expectation is that that will change behavior-
Yeah. Mm-hmm.
... and the speed of getting things done.
Um, you know, other things like earthquake prone buildings, for example-
Yeah.
... I think will have a, uh, quite immediate and significant impact for large
numbers of people. I mean, th- that's been a very challenging piece of policy to
work through, you know, 'cause its genesis was, you know,
post-Christchurch and trying to make, get the balance of protection
versus, uh, cost benefit. So I think some of those things, and
we know from discussions with people who have been affected by the earthquake,
prime buildings for example, that the amount of stress, uh, and challenge for
some of those, uh-
(coughs) ... people have been really high.
Yes.
Uh, and we were seeing levels of non-compliance because it wasn't able
to be complied with.
Mm-hmm.
So, for example, we've, we've estimated this is going to take about $8
billion of cost, um, out. And taking Auckland out, for example.
(clears throat) Yeah.
You know, the, the risk in Auckland is probably far more volcanic than, than
seismic, uh, and yet, uh, 40% of the cost from the earthquake prime
building regime was, was located in Auckland.
Mm-hmm.
Um, so look, really proud to have, to have the teams involved in this.
I do want to call out, as I know Suzanne did this morning-
(laughs)
... just, just their commitment and work.
Yeah.
Uh, and, uh, you'd expect that everyone's a bit tired at this time of year,
um, and you'd almost be-
Not
as good as I feel. ... surprised that they weren't.
But they do-
I think that-
They are also very positive about what they've achieved so far.
Absolutely.
So that
keeps you going. It's great to be able to do stuff that, that actually, you know, is going to impact
on people's lives positively.
Mm-hmm. That's wonderful.
So, are you saying that, um, your- you could measure your
impact by the, um, the economic benefits that we're
seeing, um, as being one of the main, um, measures?
In which case there's straightaway $8 billion, um, and all
of the others. So that's-
Yeah. ... quite a substantial return on whatever investment it would- was required.
I- I- I think we'd- we'd- we'd seek to measure impact on a range of factors.
Uh, economic obviously is an important one.
We are-
... an economic agency. Uh, you know, some of the things we've done, for example,
in the building products space, uh, is to expand the market, uh,
and, you know, reduce costs and increase choice for consumers.
Mm-hmm.
Uh, the $8 billion is- is another case.
But actually, economics is a proxy measure
for-
Yes. ... people and their experiences as well-
Mm-hmm.
... and the cost for them for- for doing building, how easy it is to- to buy a
house and things. So yeah, economics is a proxy for that, but at the end of the
day, it's how it impacts on people.
Okay. Any more questions on this topic? Yeah, Anne Williams.
Um, just going to the granny flats, I agree with you that that's something you
might expect to see soon. Um, and I wanted to ask around the
modeling that MBIE, um,
did and the advice they provided, um, to government and helpfully to the
committee that dealt with the bill, um, because those numbers moved around and I
want to know what you're seeing now as actual numbers.
I think the initial, um, estimate of the number of granny flats that would be built
was somewhere around 7,000 and then by the end of, uh, the committee's hearings, we
were considering 13,000.
Yeah.
Um, that makes a big difference, especially if they're grouped up in somewhere like
Auckland. Um, what are you seeing coming through the system at the moment?
What are your expectations based on how the market has responded to that, about the
uptake?
Okay, so I'll have to come back to you on the specific numbers.
Oh, it's okay.
Yeah.
I- I don't need the specific numbers, but I- I'm asking you order of magnitude.
Okay, so I think what- what we've seen is quite a lot of interest in it.
As you know, through the committee process, uh, there was quite a lot of
fine-tuning about what the nature-
Mm-hmm.
... of those provisions would be, the- the relationship to...
'cause it wasn't just the building, uh, the code, it was also about how the RM
system worked with that as well. Um, so I think through that
we- we basically fine-tuned and the committee fine-tuned, you know, just exactly
where were the risky things. Uh, we made some changes, for example, that would
allow and were about to allow, uh, uh, wet areas to be
fitted within, uh, gr- granny flats.
That required a specific different change 'cause there are some risks around, uh,
flat wet- wet areas. Um, we can come back with the actual numbers.
There's been quite a lot of interest, I- but I don't know exactly how
much building taking place to date.
Just what about... Um, MBIE did a lot of advice and con- consultation
with the sector in this last year around, um, allowing granny flats to be built on
Maori land and enabling papakainga-
Yeah. Mm-hmm, yeah.
... that was missing from the final legislation.
Um, w- what is MBIE doing to ensure that that work and that goodwill that there is
out there for Maori land to have granny flats associated with
either dwellings or marae, um, isn't just lost or- or
parked on the sort of policy thinking stage?
So, we have a limited role in going out and- and doing, uh, I suppose marketing
of- of this is the new thing that you can do.
We've made sure it's very freely available.
Um, I think the- the- the point that you're raising, and it's a really good one,
is, you know, what channels can we use to make sure that people know what they can
now do? Um, so we'd expect both the BCAs but also, um,
and I think this is probably something we haven't done but maybe we should, is
reaching out through, uh, iwi groups and saying, "Look, just want to make sure that
you are aware that you can now do this on papakainga," et cetera, and it's, you
know, that's more liberalized. So I think that's probably something we should
follow up on.
I- I just- I think the question is that, um, of the major
dwellings that are- that allow for, um, gr- granny flats
to be built alongside them, marae is not one.
Mm-hmm.
But that doesn't seem to have been what MBIE consulted on.
Um, but the legislative outcome is that you cannot build these as
papakainga associated with a marae, you must have a major dwelling.
Yeah, and I think, um, the major dwelling...
'Cause the marae, as you know, is- is not a household unit.
Uh, so that was the- the policy genesis of it.
I think, you know, it was considered, um, but it's- the- the government decided
that they wanted to stick with the major dwellings.
Right, that's a shame. Um, just on the...
Also a question about the, uh, earthquake prone buildings and-
Yeah.
... yeah, absolutely agree with you and, um, shout- a shout out to your team about
what is a very complicated area of policy work and consultation with
stakeholders. Um,
the, um, decision around the exclusion of
Auckland, um, you've said is related to the risk
for, um, vol- volcanic risk but not
necessarily earthquakes. I think, um, the quote that
remains with most politicians I would say that, uh, when the mayor was talking
about, you know, the last earthquake in Auckland was 70,000 years ago.
Um, why, uh, though when volcanoes are
associated with seismic risk do now none of the standards,
um, recognize what you- you've rightly pointed to as the volcanic risk?
So, um, we took advice, uh, from Earth Sciences New Zealand as they're now
called and GNS around the seismic risk areas in New Zealand, and I think there are
about three or four areas that have differential seismic risk.
So, uh, Auckland and, uh, that part of the country had the very,
very lowest seismic risk. Uh, Wellington, as you would expect, had high
seismic risk. Canterbury was moderate.
Otago was actually higher than we had expected, so that moved into- into a slightly
higher seismic risk zone. Um, so it- it's true that, um, if you're
in the- the, uh, you know, New Zealand is a geologically young country
and it is seismically active, but within that space, uh, the Auckland area
was advised to us by the, uh, geological scientists as being the lowest risk.
So it wasn't associat- the volcano was really meant- meant to be a- a counterpoint
about there's a number of risks that people face in everyday life.
In the Auckland space, the advice that we received was that the seismic
risk was relatively low compared to the rest of the country.
It, I mean, that is my question. There are 53 volcanoes in Auckland.
Yeah.
Volcanoes make buildings shake.
Why do we not have rules now in place in Auckland that are designed to upgrade
buildings so that when they shake they don't...
... uh, cause, cause damage.
So, I mean, the, the building code does include in it, you know, the, the
rules that you have to do to make sure it's solid and firm, et cetera.
The problem with the earthquake prone regime, and, as you'll know, is
(clears throat) that it was, uh, predicated on the fact that any one element of the
building could result in an MBS, which would be, you know-
Mm-hmm.
... perhaps lower than 30-
Mm-hmm. ... even if it was a very simple thing.
In addressing, uh, a more, uh, risk-based approach to, uh,
the regulations around that, we did two things.
Uh, we looked at the likely seismic re- 'cause, 'cause risk
mitigation is always a likelihood impact.
Um (clears throat) , so we looked at, uh, likelihood on seismic regimes and
again, the advice that we received from the scientists was, in a seismic, uh,
risk area, Auckland was relatively low.
Uh, and then you look at, uh, what the, the consequence is, uh, so
we basically said there's not a major issue in Auckland, but in other, uh, other
areas, there, there is a risk, and that risk is largest with, uh, buildings that
are greater than three stories, unreinforced masonry, or, you know, heavily
concrete ones.
Mm-hmm.
Right. Mm-hmm.
Right. I'll ask a question about consumer rights.
So I was just looking at, uh, the numbers and it shows that, uh,
it's 55% of people, uh, a- and this is adult
consumers, those who know at least a moderate amount about their rights as a
consumer. Uh, this is a 10% increase compared to
last measurement in 2022, 2023, but
still it looks quite low, 55%. Uh, I mean,
w- what is the issue there, that it's only 55% of adult
consumers know what their rights are as consumers?
I, I think it is, uh, it's always the
complexities of,
you know, trying to explain a broad brush of, um,
legislation to consumers around what can they, what can they do via, in the
various pieces of legislation there are.
For us and the small team that we have in terms of in that space,
where, where we have managed-
(coughs)
... and I have to say that 10% is quite an achievement to, to lift that amount of
awareness through a population of, you know, 5.3 million, um, is
around us making sure that we are using the best channels we can in terms of
communication. What we're, what we do when we measure that
awareness level is we do set ourselves a reasonably high bar about, you know,
when consumers see that aware, it's not just that aware, "Oh, can I take my product
back?" And they have an awareness of what their rights are in terms of
under the Consumer Guarantees Act.
So to get to that level is relatively
good, um, believe it or not. I, obviously I would love it to be
100%, but I don't think we'll, we'll always be
there. What we would really look to seek to do is that
consumers know where to go to find that advice.
So even if they don't know it in the moment, "What am I allowed to do?
I've got this..." for like, it's just, and this is just an example, not a real life
example. "If I've got this fridge I've just bought and it doesn't work after I've
sent the... How do I take it? But, you know, what can I do? Can I take it back?
Do I have to do this? Do I have to do that?
What are my rights?" What we need to know is that they can go
to a well-known safe place to get that
advice, and that's where we've got to ensure that government information
is up there and set and lights for them so that they
don't need to know everything about the legislation in their heads-
Mm-hmm. ... as much as my colleagues know.
Mm-hmm.
Um, I would probably phone them first, but if not, you know where to go.
And so-
Mm-hmm.
... I think that's where our consumer protection information, the awareness
campaigns that we run in those spaces, stuff about product safety is to try and
find, if you're unsure, at least know where to go.
Mm-hmm.
Um, I'm not sure how many calls we take on that.
We take quite a few calls and on most occasion, uh, most
days around, uh, people looking for their, trying to understand some
more about what they can do. Um,
I think last year we did about
198 recalls we would have published and pro- just
under the 200, doesn't include the recent.
I've, um, got included the recent as well.
Um, but it is a constant ongoing piece of work for us to try and
lift that level of understanding so that consumers are on a fair play- field.
Mm-hmm.
You know, and they understand what they can do and that-
Yeah.
... they have rights.
Yeah. So what was done-
Mm-hmm.
... uh, like, um, differently, uh, between 2022 to
2023 to 2024, 2025, to
have this increase of 10%? Because it, it was consistent
before that, uh, 2020 and 2021 report had
45%-
Mm-hmm.
... then 2022 and 2023 had 45 and now it's 55.
So what happened in this period that you got this increase?
So I guess one of the things we have done is lean much more into proactive
media in that space. Um, you'll have probably seen
we, we have a, a, it's almost an, a celebrity spokesperson now,
um, Ian Caplan who's on TV every, it feels like every five minutes talking about
consumer rights. Um, we have proactively gone with
our comms team to get ourselves when there is an issue
to use the pulpit that MBIE has, um, to get
access to media to talk to, and the, the public in,
through programs that we know they are listening to-
Mm-hmm.
Mm-hmm. ... um, and also through social media channels that we know would be.
So I think what you're seeing is the result of our targeting, the improved
targeting we have-
Mm-hmm.
... and being actually more, let's see, um, leaning
in and being more planned and purposeful around how we're using
those communication channels and how we measure the impact of those
channels too.
Sure.
I, I would just add that, um, Suzanne mentioned that we've
got, uh, one of our, I guess, ways that we reach c- uh,
consumers is through our campaigns.
So, um, to add in terms of how we might have,
uh, bumped up that figure, this year, this past
year, we've done some great work in terms of, um, Toy Safety
Week. We got really great, um, uh, I
guess, audience reaction to that.
Got 3.1 million, um, impressions across
the campaign. Um, 45,000 video views.
We did a blind cord safety awareness week because that's a
particular thing that we've, um, heard needs to be addressed.
We've also put, um, done, uh, some stuff around
fraud week. So we use-
(coughs) ... opportunities like that to get it into the, um, the
public kind of, um, arena.
Mm.
So that we can leverage those opportunities to up the consumer
knowledge.
I think we're-
Thanks.
... always looking for a platform.
(laughs)
Yeah. Thanks for those examples. Um, any more questions in this part, members, part
five? Yeah, Arena Williams.
Um, I want, I just wanna bring you to the, uh, work that MBIE's done on the
insulation rules. Um, and, you know, this is
a-
Yeah.
... uh, rules that apply to the building sector issue, but it's also about economic
development. Um, the steel extruders and, uh, windows
manufacturers around the country, um, estimate that they've
spent a billion dollars in, um, gearing up to comply
collectively with, um, the regulations as they were,
um, being introduced a couple of years ago that was in line with
international trends around insulation, um, improving in
homes and in drier homes, um, being government priorities around the
world. With that being walked back, um, it has a significant impact on their
business and their competitiveness, um, with, with overseas
products. How have you, um, dealt with this
concentration with the industry?
Have we got the right balance here when now these New Zealand businesses
were, um, you know, acting in the way that they thought was exactly
right-
... and have now borne these, um-
Hm.
... costs which, uh, put them on the back foot, and these regional
employers with hundreds of jobs now on the line?
It, it is always quite hard, and we were, uh,
very, um, conscious and advise ministers at the time that, you know, when you're
changing regulatory settings, particularly where people have made investment
decisions on the basis of that, you've got to be really thoughtful and make sure
that the cost of doing that to society, uh, w- will, benefits to
society, uh, outweigh the costs of doing it.
Uh, so you will be aware that we went for an, a number of consultations
on H1. Uh-
Mm.
And w- when it was first implemented, we had a number of people coming in saying,
"Actually, this is not necessarily recognizing the reality of, uh, different
regions." Again, because New Zealand's a very long, thin country, and the,
the, the, um,
climate conditions in Auckland are very different from the climate conditions in
Otago. And one of, uh, bits of feedback we got was, "Can we recognize that, please?
So that in the insulation requirements, we do that."
Mm-hmm.
Um, other things, what we were asked to do was to assess whether the R ratings, uh,
for individual windows, for example, were appropriate, whether we take into account
wall thickness. Um, so it's fair to say that we, there was, um, there
were voices on all sides of the spectrum saying either it was too tough or
it was too loose, or that, um, we'd already made investments.
Um, so where, um, ministers ended up landing on that
is basically quite a balanced approach.
So didn't walk back the whole thing.
Said, "Look, there are some, uh, adjustments and improvements that we can make, uh,
to recognize differential R values of either different products or the regional
variations." Uh, we were conscious that there had been...
and 'cause we talked to the industries that you're referring to, and they said,
"Look, we've already put in some windows," et cetera, and, um, and, and there's
no reason why they can't be used. It's just that they will not be required.
So, that's the other thing, is that, you know, people can all...
uh, the building code is the minimum standard. It is not the maximum standard.
Uh, and there'll be a number of folks who want, uh, the very best insulation they
can have.
Mm.
Um, and you know, as long as it also has matched with ventilation.
That's the other thing that we- we are seeing.
Uh, so, um, I- I understand the point you are making.
I think the, the government had tri- uh, tended to recei- uh, reach a
balance, um, in the, in the final decision.
Um, just, uh, slightly diff- tack
on, on the same-
Mm.
... issue around insulation then.
Um, the Building for Climate Change work, or form- formerly known as
Building for Climate Change, um, is something that the minister will point to,
but there doesn't seem to be further work from MBIE, um, along that work
stream. Things like, um, energy efficiency, um,
insulation standards for commercial...
Um, those, those things which, um, seem to be ready to go from a
policy perspective to legislate for.
Um, how do we ensure that, um, the signals that
industry are getting around these things from government-
Yeah.
... are consistent, um, in that if it's not now, then they're still
preparing for what will be an expensive change for, um, owners at
some point in the future?
So, I mean, the work has not stopped on thinking about what changes we
need to make to code. And it will largely be in the code changes rather than
necessarily legislative. Um, however, one of the things that we did, um,
reflect on this year, uh, was that we were changing the building code three,
maybe four times a year. Um, which, you know, as issues came
up, you'd make the change. But actually, that, what that means is if you're in the
building construction industry, uh, then you have to adjust three or four times
a year to a new set of rules. And if you're partway through doing a building,
uh, and you have to get even a minor variation, you then have to adopt the new
code.
Mm.
Uh, so where we landed on that was that was providing a really uncertain
operating environment. There's probably no other area of regulation where we change
that regularly.
Mm-hmm.
Uh, what we've moved to do now is say, "Look, we will have a regular, uh, triennial
adjustment to the code unless there is something urgent or life setting
threatening that needs to be addressed." Uh, that we will signal well in advance to
what those changes are likely to be, that we will work, uh, in concert with our
Australian colleagues, because many of the issues that we face trans-Tasman are the
same.
Mm-hmm.
And we will look to align our code changes.
That should, um, provide the industry with some good lead
time about what the code changes will be 'cause we won't just, you know,
announce a new code. It will be consulted on the way through.
There's technical specifications that need to be worked through.
Uh, so they'll get plenty of warning before the next code change and can gear up
for it.
Just on the, um, point that you've rightly made about, uh, working with the
Australian counterparts, um, and, and other jurisdictions we like to
compare ourselves to, with overseas products coming into New Zealand now-
Yeah. ... the way that they, um, might not have before, in, in
buildings where it's not obvious to consumers whether they have been tested
appropriately, whether they work to standard, um-There is an
urgent piece of work there for him, be it to make sure that now, um, th- that
our compliance systems are appropriate and that they are responsive.
Um, manufacturers in New Zealand are raising alarm bells now with me, with
other parliamentarians, um, around the standard of the products
that even they're importing to look to onsell, then they test it
against their standards and finding that they don't meet, um, the requirements that
they thought they were buying into.
How do we avoid, um, more overseas products coming in which are in fact not
compliant or fraudulent about their compliance?
So, there's two different things there. One is making sure that...
Uh, so it's not a willy-nilly, uh, type of approach.
Um, in fact, you cannot import a building product for use in a building
unless it's been approved by us through one of the standards specifications.
So, you know, uh, we approve about th- I think about 130
different s- uh, standards. Australia, uh, and international and
ISO. Uh, we've also approved the watermark, uh, standards that come
from Australia, for example. So, there are recognized and
accepted standards, uh, that have to be reported against.
Those standards, if the product is produced t- uh, according to those, will
have documentation that goes with it, because, you know, if you get a...
if it's a AS2000, there'll be a, there'll be a certificate that you can
bring. The fraudulent issue is a different matter, and that's a matter that's,
uh, it's not unique to imported products.
Could happen with domestic products as well. So I think there's a...
It can, um, so, you know, you- you want to be thoughtful about that.
Um, one of the things that we will look at when we are, uh, approving the
standards that can be applied to is, do we have confidence in the regulatory
systems in the other jurisdictions?
So there might be some areas where we might say, "Look, we're not entirely sure
that you can trust a cert- a certificate that comes out of that jurisdiction, uh,
so it's unlikely to be approved." Uh, the other aspect enforc-...
so there's two elements to the building products regime.
Firstly is the product, and secondly is the use within the, of the system.
So even though a product's been approved, it has to be used in the system that,
that it also is co-compliant, whether that's an approved solution or something
else.
What... Do you anticipate changes, um, given the experience
of now having more imported products coming into the system, more complaints coming
to you, um, about the compliance of those products, and more
consumer, um, interest in, in that?
So, um, we haven't seen any indication of that to
date, and we think that the first indication we would get would th-...
would be through the BCAs. They still do inspections.
(laughs)
Um, and, you know, if something was obviously non-compliant, I think that would be
picked up in that context. Uh, but then we do have a de-...
a determinations team and our own team who would, you know, w-...
look to go and look at their compliance too if we were seeing systemic issues.
Okay.
A quick sup on that. You mentioned about some, uh, certificates issued in other
countries may not be equivalent to our certificates here.
Is there like an easy way for people to access which countries they should give
priority to so that they don't have to go through this hassle of making sure that
the certificates they issue are actually-
So, um, it's unlikely that an individual consumer will necessarily want to go
and, uh, to seek c- certification or approval. You can go to our website.
Uh, and all the standards that I have been approved for importation are listed
there. It's quite an extensive list. It's a technical list. I looked at it my-...
in prep for this session.
(laughs)
I went through and w-... uh, read it myself.
Please don't
I'm not sure I'm any the wiser. Uh, but, but actually, those people who are
involved in the technical building specs will be-
They will know.
... and our compliance team are.
Okay. Okay. Um, y- yeah, Irene.
Just a question about the fire safety review work that you've done last year.
Um,
obviously there will be some anxiety around that, um, for both building owners,
um, and building users. Um, i- do you intend
to continue to work on that or, um, do you see that as coming to a sort of a
natural end in this year?
Um, I think, uh, uh, next year it will come to a, to natural end.
A- and as I said, we move those things into a more regular cycle of-
Right.
... uh, of building amendments. Unless there is something that happens that raises
a concern about a gap or a, a, you know, a risk that's in the existing
regulatory set that's not otherwise addressed.
Right. We go to, uh, Dr. David Wilson.
Uh, I've just got two little issues that you can help me with on performance
measures. Um, uh, first of all, pat on the back.
Um, the, uh,
NZCRS, the Claims Resolution
Service-
Mm-hmm. ... achieved 84% with a target of 75%, and that's to achieve timely
and effective resolution of residential insurance claims resulting
from natural disasters.
Mm-hmm.
And I can see your statistician was behind this one with a response rate of 33%
and plus or minus 1% margin of error.
(laughs) Mm-hmm. The calculators were right, yep.
(laughs) Noted earlier that you're moving to outcome measures, so this is all
good. Um, two down from that, uh, we're looking, um, the result
for intellectual property, um, the IPO
and the Plant Variety Rights Office.
Mm-hmm.
And your target was 99%. You achieved
99.99%, and the year before you achieved
We're not perfect.
Please explain. (laughs)
(laughs) I will start with we're not perfect.
(laughs)
Um, we... Look, our team's there. IPONZ team in particular have
been working particularly hard around looking at their processes, their
use of technology. Um, they, they...
Of course, being the Intellectual Property Office, they're always looking at other
new ways of doing things. So even though we were at 99.9, you can see
we don't settle. So, even then they were looking for, how
could we get better? I mean, Ingrid, you might want to ta-...
I mean, Ingrid, previous life, actually ran that office a number of years
ago, but... So, we just... we, we just don't stop trying to get
better.
Right.
Yeah.
(laughs)
That office has a really strong continuous improvement culture.
They're always looking to eke out even a small
improvement. Um, and I'll just give them a shout-out that they
continue to do that even though some of their, um,
applications are increasing. So in the trademark space, they've seen like
almost 9% in- increase in applications, and that's,
um, manageable because they try and eke out those
little, uh, um, efficiencies. So they're in a
space where they're confronted with innovative thinking all of the time.
That's the purpose of it, um, intellectual property.
So they bring that to the work as well.
Actually, the one-
So perhaps a different measure?
Oh, well, yes, perhaps, yeah.
Yeah. (laughs) And, um, just a little pat on the back there, uh, visited a small
business, manufacturing business, they're exporting modular toilets all over the
world.
Mm-hmm.
And, uh, asked them a question around innovation and said, "Oh, we currently have
six patents."
Yeah.
Mm-hmm.
And I think if you look at, um, New Zealand and its role in
terms of inventions and patents and that, we punch far, far above
our weight. Um, what we really need to help, um, work on
is how do we then take the next level and commercialize that.
And well done to that organization for making, um, that next move.
Yeah.
But that's really key for us to get from that small stage of patent
development and through to commercialization, whether that is through their
own company or through the licensing and commercialization in other
ways.
Did you just call out your next performance measure?
(laughs) I called out the next section, and I'm w- I'm conscious-
Oh, I
thought that you- ... of the chair (laughs) , so I'm not gonna go there.
(laughing) Um-
Thank you.
... we have so- uh, maybe question from Arena Williams.
Just a quick one. Um-
If I can get it.
Is MBIE responding to the calls from apartment dwellers and
Dr. Kimberly O'Sullivan from Otago University to introduce standards
for high temperatures in dwellings, um, given that that's missing from the Healthy
Home Standards?
So, conscious of the discussion around that, particularly, you know, just the high
glazing, et cetera. Uh, we've been having discussions with the industry about that.
Uh, as I said, unless it, uh, reaches a certain threshold for, uh,
uh, an immediate change, we'll, we'll reflect th- any changes in the
next building code update.
Is, um... Just asking d- genuinely.
Yeah.
Not sure what, um, what the high threshold for immediate change
is. Um, they describe it as unbearably hot.
It's like a sauna, but hotter than that.
Yeah.
Um, is that approaching immediate change?
So, so, so th- there is not a bright line test, uh, to, to say
what that would look like. Um, and I'm very conscious of the issues that have been
raised this year. Um, it, what, what is interesting though is it does appear that
the industry themselves have become quite a- uh, quite aware of the fact that you
can do, through design, like awnings, like l- uh, the lower glazing,
et cetera, reduce the risk of light coming through.
The other issue, as you know, though, is that if you don't have through
ventilation, which can mitigate for other things, in a townhouse if you can't do
that-
Mm-hmm.
... then that's becoming problematic.
What's I think really interesting is that the discussion this year has highlighted
both the design choices that people can make and mitigations.
Mm-hmm. Mm-hmm.
So, uh, y- yes, I mean, and if we, if we changed code now, it wouldn't
affect the ones that have already been built, uh, 'cause retrospective adjustments,
you know, highly challenging. Uh, and it does appear at the moment
the discussions around the design community have already factored in some of those
things. So we'll keep a watch and brief on it.
We are working on what some of those choices might be.
Whether or not it breaches, reaches that threshold for an immediate change, can't
say, but we'll keep our eye open for the industry next year.
Okay, good. So members, now we move on to part six,
uh, science, uh, which includes science system reforms and funding, government
procurement, global connections, and, um,
investment.
Any questions for the panelists?
No.
Reuben Davidson. Or either one.
Which order we've got? Can we kind of-
Chair swap and go on?
Yeah. (laughs) That's what I would do.
Yeah.
I
don't need
to know.
Okay. All right.
Lovely. Um, I'll start with a really
succinct question. Does the government still believe in
scientists? And if so, which ones?
Uh, um, I think, can you ask a question about them-
(laughs)
... uh, rather than the government's?
Well, they, you, they may have an opinion on that given the restructure and things.
No, no, this is not about, um, their opinion or our opinion.
This is about we are... This is our review.
Um,
okay.
I'll come back to you.
Okay.
Dr. Davidson's family.
From primary 10.
Um, and sort of perhaps what, um, Mr.
Davidson was referring to, the, the science system reforms,
uh, to achieve greater innovation and
technology. Um, we heard this morning from, uh,
Mr. Bigu about, uh, regional development efforts and how
different some of the regions are in terms of the structure of their economy, et
cetera. And we seem to be,
um, trying to make this connection between, you know, beginning research
moving into commercialization and how do we actually activate that?
Of course, you pull those two things together, they are a little different
and may be complementary. So my question is with these
system reforms, how can we gear these, this system
towards understanding what the regional needs are in terms
of, uh, uh, innovation and science
help?
Hmm.
Yeah, look, um, great question. I think a lot of the, um, particularly the
institutional changes, uh, to the CRIs and the mergers is
really, uh, looking at how to, um, make more of those institutions, to get them
closer to industry, um, to be looking at those
commercializations. The, um, the merger into the
Bioeconomy Sciences Institute in particular, um,
now covers, you know, large parts of the, of our export, um, mix,
and they have, uh, locations around the country.
Um, and they will be, as part of these reforms, um, and we will be monitoring them
that they do get closer to industry, uh, in, across the
country to be able to, as you say, make those, um, innovations and, and
commercialization happen.
So just a supplementary, one of the issues that I've found in working in this space
in Northland is that you will get a kind of silo effect from
Wellington
and from the CRIs. In other words, they're focused on their
area, whereas at the regional level, they're looking
across and looking at sectors and using
those resources to integrate with other actions to
support businesses and or sectors.
So the vertical is great, but the horizontal is
harder. Can you sort of make some comment to that?
I, I think, um, the, one of the benefits to these, uh,
mergers in, is that you don't have a, a-...
and the risk of having a silo across the forestry sector through Scion
or, or through the, um, agri... Um, oh-
Yeah.
... actually, through AgriTurch, actually you're looking across that.
I think that is one of the benefits of having a, um, combined
institutions, um, so that there should be much less risk of a
siloed approach.
Yeah, no, I'm thinking also of the stakeholders at a regional
level. Yeah, so-
Mr. Pegu would like to-
(laughs)
... add-
Come in from the regional-
Sorry.
He just can't help himself.
Thank you, Dr. Wilson.
(laughs)
So as you're aware, the, the regional network was established as part of the
Provincial Development Unit has been in place for eight years now, and
this, I would say 99.999% of the people that
were started are still there.
Yeah.
And the network that they have established goes across multiple
sectors, including NGOs and local government.
And there is a raft of information that comes back into Wellington of
what small, innovative entrepreneurial businesses are
trying to do.
Okay.
Um, and whether they're struggling to find venture capital or start
up or, or pre-commercialization-
Yep.
... or sorry, yes, commercialization, um,
capital from traditional markets.
And that's quite often where the Regional Infrastructure Fund's
predecessors-
Yeah.
... were targeted.
It's a bit more difficult under this Regional Infrastructure Fund
because they are looking to fund hard infrastructure projects.
But that network and that, that, I think that, um,
the ability for those people in regions to p- provide the
open door back into Wellington, to then be able to provide information
to MPI's various funds or to bring it into the science group in
MBIE, uh, does, I think, mean that it's just not all a one-way
street out of Wellington. Mm-hmm.
In fact, it's one of the benefits. I mean, we talked about, right at the start
about scope and scale of MBIE, in that it
is much easier for us to share that information as an
organization when you've got two people who sit around a table in
terms of like, Robert... Robert and Nick, having those conversations
without it having to go from agency to agency.
So it's, it's one of the benefits of, of the breadth of MBIE in terms of
its economic responsibilities, that it can sit around one table and have those
discussions, what's happening in the regions, what's happening in science, what's
happening in other sectors.
Yeah, and one feedback, if any, um, is that having an
operational agency such as Kanoa working in regions to
create those networks is absolutely vital.
Mm-hmm. Okay.
Thank you.
Yeah.
So, uh, new primary, Ricardo (indistinct) .
Thank you very much. Do you have any information
on, uh, the job market for scientists, and if so,
do you know whether it has grown or shrunk over the period we're
examining?
I mean, I don't, but... (laughs)
Not over the period, what, what I've, um-
More generally.
What, what I do have is the total number of science roles in the...
And this is really the private sector workforce, increased to, from
28,000 to 30,000 from 2022 to
2024. Um, so you are seeing growth
overall. Um, in the, uh, in the public science
sector, obviously within the CRI, um, cohort, there's about two and a half
thousand science roles within the, within the, um, public research
organizations. Um, and you're also seeing now,
uh, new investments being made into areas of, uh, advanced
technology with, and the reg- the government's recently announced an AI
platform. Um, there are others there.
So, um, it's, while I would certainly accept that there
is, um, not in- increases in funding into the public science
system, um, there is, uh, certainly in Budget '25,
funding was maintained, um, within the science sector.
Um, there are opportunities emerging, and particularly the growth in the private
sector is, is really quite, um, uh, exciting, and it also
links into the R&D tax incentive, which I talked about briefly this morning as
well.
With this, this establishment of the Callaghan Innovation, um, what
work, if any, did you do to ensure that, uh, people who would have lost
their jobs could transition to other jobs, if any?
So with Callaghan, the, uh, a number of the functions were transferred into
other parts of the science system, so-
I meant for transition for the jobs.
So basically whether you did any work to, to help people who lost their job
transition into other jobs.
Yeah, so my first point was just that a lot of people didn't lose their jobs.
A lot of people... A lot of the functions were, um, maintained within
the science system. Some came to MBIE-
MBIE.
... some came to, uh, Earth Sciences New Zealand and so on.
Mm-hmm.
Um, for the, uh, the other roles, I think there's a net reduction
of, um-
55.
... 55 roles, and, uh, they will...
I'm not close to that, but, um, I know that Callaghan will have been working with
their other, other colleagues across the science system to be looking for
opportunities there.
Mm-hmm. Okay. Uh, Reuben Davidson?
Thank you. Um, is it your assessment that the new science
funding board, Research Funding New Zealand, has sufficient transparency in its
decision making?
Uh, so yes, we are comfortable with the way that it's being, um, set
up. It is, uh, that will be set out in the, um,
Science, Innovation and Technology, um, Bill, which is, uh, yet to
be, uh, yet to be introduced to the House, but that will formalize
independence arrangements, um, very similar to the science board that is
currently legislated in the, um, Research, Uh, Science and Technology
Act. Um, so that, that will, um,
provide that in- uh, independence and decision making around science
projects. Uh, we will, MBIE will be the secretariat for
that board, and we will be, uh, undertaking to, again, make,
um, as much material, uh, transparent and,
and, uh- (coughs)
... public as possible.
Yeah, f- just for clarity, the legislation, which is still draft, um,
has exactly the same provisions as the current legislation which drive the behavior
and function of the Masterton Council.
So i- it will be exactly the same. Cool. Thank you.
Okay. Um, I'll ask a question here.
So with the, um, merger of CRIs, we know that that's happening kind of,
there were existing functions and kind of projects, um, people,
capabilities, expertise being merged, but with the new,
uh, uh, um, the advanced technology-
Mm-hmm.
... uh, PRO, because that is going to be done from the
scratch. So very, uh, keen to understand how that is
looking at what kind of support you're providing in that.
One, one of the key things with the Institute of Advanced Technology is it is
a, a hub and spoke model. So it's not
a, uh, it's not going to be an institute that-
Mm-hmm.
... employs a large number of scientists to do new science.
It is, uh, gonna have a, uh, hub which will be, um,
located in Auckland, um, that will do the, um,
foresighting work, do the, um, run processes
around, um, different investment platforms.
Uh, and then those particular platforms will be from,
um, either one or more providers from within the science system.
So the, the first, uh, first platform,
um, was, uh, the Robinsons Research Institute around, um, uh,
magnetics. Um, and, uh, the second is an
AI, uh, that's currently in, in the market.
And so we'll be looking for, um, responses that are one or more,
as I say, providers. So it is, it is from scratch, but it's
not creating it-
Yeah.
... within one institution.
Okay. Okay.
Can I just hop on that?
That's up... Yeah.
(clears throat) So with, with the AI platform,
um, you're looking for... Um, so there's two
phases. Um, the first phase is of course around five applicants
will receive about 250,000 each to develop
plat- a detailed platform proposal.
Then phase two is a single winner potentially receiving up to
$70 million over seven, seven years.
What was the thinking about, um, having such maybe a
winner-takes-all approach rather than actually having kind of
smaller, over a, a more wider range
of, of, of providers?
Th- that sort of a quantum, that sort of 7 million a year, is, um,
c- similar to other science platforms that we fund already through
our, um, our Science, uh, System Investment Fund.
So you need to have a, a level of critical mass for a particular science
platform to be, to be viable, to be able to, um, to be funded.
So, uh, that was the, you know, that quantum feels
like, uh, about the right level. And of course, we will get, um, those proposals
through the process to see, um, what, you know, what, what is
proposed. Uh, but they will also have the opportunity to, to
build consortia. So there might be not just one organization.
In fact, we are encouraging industry linkages, um, you know-
Mm-hmm.
... consortia, international linkages.
Um, so we're working through... We've, we've had a number of applications.
We're really pleased to get, um, quite a lot of interest and we'll be working
through that. But it's, it won't necessarily be just one institution.
It would be very unusual for a platform to fund a single, uh,
provider.
That would be very unusual.
Mm-hmm.
Yeah, I suppose that's what I was kind of getting at.
Yeah, no, no. Well, we would expect multiple parties to be, uh, part of that
platform.
Mm-hmm.
The way platforms work is that you fund an, uh, one, one, one
entity (clears throat) who then connects with multiple entities, but you've got,
uh, one provider effectively working with multiple parties-
Mm-hmm.
... as part of a consortia, as, as Nick said.
Can I ask something?
Yep, so-
A- are you expecting the, the, the winner, so to speak, or the
consortia, are you expecting to have multiple different
projects within that consortia or are you all thinking that it's going to be
leading into one, one direction?
I mean, I think we're, we're really open on that.
I think the, the key thing is that, um, uh, that we're looking for
something that is an application of AI to a problem that's important to New
Zealand. So it's very much focused on a, a mission that is important to New
Zealand.
Mm-hmm.
Uh, and inevitably there will be a number of components to that.
Yeah.
Um, but, uh, but all based around a, a core mission.
Yep. Okay. Uh, we have a new primary from Cushion.
Thank you, Madam Chair. (foreign language)
Hi.
Um, the report notes that Māori professional, scientific, and tech-
Yeah.
... services sector has increased four-fold.
Um, but that only 4.8% are engaged.
Do you know why? And what's being done to increase
that?
Sorry, I'm not across that particular, um, report, report...
Oh, um, uh, your, your annual report.
Oh, our annual report.
I see. All right. I, I don't have an answer to that off the top of my head.
I'm sorry. Um, but, uh, that's something that we can get back to you on.
Thank you.
If, if you mean engaged as employed as scientists?
No, no.
As in engaged in the services.
Oh, okay. Yeah. No-
Thanks.
... this one we'll have to come back to you.
Thank you.
Yeah.
Okay. Uh, new primary from-
If I may though, that it is a known issue in the system, um,
uh, minority groups and indeed women, where we want
more
(laughs) , um, pa- uh, stronger participation in the system.
Mm-hmm.
Uh, that is a known, uh, challenge.
We do have some funds that, to try and support that.
One example actually is the He Ara Whakahihiko, which is currently,
um, uh, being close to being finalized, but that's one that
does try and build both a combination of science and also Māori, um,
capability. So there are, as Ian says, those sorts of programs to try and help
build capability.
Cool. What, what was it called?
He Ara-
He Ara Whakahihiko. I think I've got that right.
We'll give you some more information. Yeah.
Oh, okay. Thank you.
D- Danette's, uh, gonna add to that.
So yeah, the He Ara Whakahihiko fund, it's got two components.
It's got, um, the Rangahau program, which is around building, um, two-year
research programs between Māori and, um, the science
community. Uh, and, uh, the other fund is,
um, can't remember the name of it, apologies, but it's a, it's a
commercialization fund. So it's enabling Māori businesses to engage with
science sector to commercialize research.
We also, um, invest in Māori capability through fellowship schemes.
So our Tawhiao Taumana, for example, um, funds a number of, uh,
Māori researchers and Pacific researchers, um, to build their research careers
to contribute as well.Okay.
Thank you.
Uh, probably from Ricardo.
Thank you. Just on the topic of AI, um,
where does New Zealand rank, uh, so far in terms of, for
example, labeling requirements around the use
of, um, content generated by artificial
intelligence?
I'm, uh, I'm, I'm actually not sure-
If you-
... of the answer to that (laughs) .
Um, um, Dean, I'm going to check with you, have, have you-
Have, have you done any work to explore, um, regulations in relationship
to disclosing, um,
AI-generated content by, say, businesses, by creators, et
cetera? Um, what work are you doing to, uh, regulate that
space-
Yeah. So-
... in term of disclosure and transparency?
Yeah, um, Dean, I will ask if you can, might want to add to this.
But, um, the, so the government's AI strategy, which was released earlier this
year, um, was deliberate to take a, uh, lighter
touch, um, regulation, regulatory approach and to rely
on existing, uh, pieces of legislation and to keep those
under review as to what might be needed, whether that's in intellectual property or
whether that's in, um, uh, the Privacy Act.
Uh, in addition, what we, what MBIE put out at the same time as that AI strategy
was guidance to business, um, to, to what are the sorts of things that you
need to consider when you're making use of AI.
And one of those is that, is, uh, is what should you be disclosing as part
of, um, part of your business? So, uh, it's been a guidance
approach and, uh, that was, that's been reasonably well received by business.
Dean, is, what would you like to add to that?
Uh,
Dean? Yeah. So, so maybe just to, um, reiterate what Nick said
there, um, the AI strategy was really making a call to
rely on existing primary legislation, so Privacy Act,
copyright, um, uh, Human Rights Acts and, and what have
you.
Mm-hmm.
And the approach has been to just look for, um, problems as, as they come
about. So recently there was a question of whether or not, uh, the
Commerce Act was sufficiently clear on, um,
if a company relies on an AI pricing mechanism and it turns out that it's,
um, doing some sort of coercionary type practice, um,
is the act clear enough to say that that's not allowed?
And the answer was largely yes.
So there's a bit of a clarification just looking for these sorts of issues.
Um, probably the other one, of course, is the member's bill that's been proposed
about harmful digital publications.
So w- the system is-
Hm.
... is as such it's looking for, um, uh, addressing problems
as they arise.
Do you have any concerns around users, um, and, and
more consumers more broadly across all ranges of industries,
um, being left wondering as technology
advances, um,
being unable to distinguish between AI-generated content and otherwise?
And if you have concerns in that space, um,
are you actively looking at potential future regulations that may
be needed to ensure that users are not, um,
I guess, tricked by (laughs) AI-generated content and, um,
misinformed at, at worst? Yeah.
I mean, it's, it's not something that the government's currently asked us to be
working on. Um, we will, we're obviously keeping a watch on what's
happening internationally. It's an evolving space and, you know, ultimately a
lot of those regulatory approaches will be, um, you know, in
Europe or the UK or, or the US and we'll need to consider how New Zealand
looks at linking into those. So we're scanning, but we're not now doing any
active work on.
Okay.
Thank you.
Now we go to Dr Hamish Lindsay.
Excellent. Brilliant, thank you.
Um, $20 million has
been, um, allocated to train 100, um,
applied doctoral, um, students.
Where are we at with, with, um, 'cause I think the aim was for 100,
100 students, where are we at with that scheme?
Uh, so, uh, we, um, put out a call for a host for the scheme and so that
was awarded to Auckland University with a number of collaborators and they've
launched their first call for PhD students, uh, and
that's in the area of energy. So there's about, I think about 12 students who'll be
funded through that call and then there'll be subsequent calls made in
areas of priority to government to train, um, applied PhDs.
So the host institute is, um, Auckland University?
Correct.
Do, do you expect some of those doctoral students to actually be
located throughout the country?
Yes, indeed. So the, they have partnered with other universities and
organizations to deliver that program so it's not just based at Auckland
University. And those students will be a- across a range of different
universities and also partner up with industry.
So part of the PhD program is to work closely with industry to develop those,
um, sort of business and innovation skills as well as those science skills.
Just this side.
Side, yeah.
Um, so you talked about the first, the first, um, tranche is in
energy. When do we expect the other, other tranches
or other-
Yeah, I don't have that-
... areas? I
don't know. I'm afraid I don't have that date in front of me but I can find out.
(laughs)
Yeah. But it will be, there will be regular calls. That's what's happening.
And I just want to, um, just to add, uh, that, I mean, I think this might be where
the question is, but this is a quite an exciting new development to try and get,
again, the science system closer to, to business-
Mm-hmm. ... closer to industry. And you're seeing that right across our settings.
That is a general theme of these reforms that we're, um, that we're aiming to
achieve.
Excellent, thank you.
And, and, um, as you said, uh, commercial, uh, link is, uh,
one of the main factors in these, uh, PhDs.
Are there, like en- enough industry groups interested in, uh, collaborating?
Yes. A number of industry groups are partnering, um, with the university and
they're tapping into things like the New Zealand product accelerator as well to,
um, to bring students in. So I've got a steering group, uh, that involves
industry participants as well as participants from academia to run the program.
It's a very strong-
So they will be all New Zealand industry groups, so it's not like overseas
collaborate?
Yeah, New Zealand only group.
Only New Zealand. Yeah. All right.
Uh, a new question from Dr Vanessa Leni?
Thank you, Madam Chair. Um, I'm just wondering if I can move us to government
procurement. Um, obviously that's a
area for-
Yeah, quite a bit of work.
Just watch the team. We've just changed some people around.
(laughs)
Yeah. Y- yeah, just changed some people around. That's great.
Um, I'm just interested in understanding both the
size of the, the work program, where you're up
to, and so a bit of the opportunity for,
um, for the country and for savings within that...
or savings or, um,
improvements somehow.
So Michael's our general manager responsible for government procurement.
Wonderful, thank you. (laughs)
Uh, kia ora, thank you for your question.
Um, this year we've had quite a lot of change within government procurement, so,
uh, predominantly our work program this year has been the new rules,
uh, that were ruled out. There was a focus on that in terms of what was
called out "Rule 8" which focuses around economic benefit.
And economic benefit really thinks about what is the, um, the
benefit specifically for New Zealand businesses first and foremost, so we have
s- have some thresholds that we work to under
$100,000. It's expected that a New Zealand
business will be awarded that work unless there's good
reason not to. Um, for construction, that goes up to $9
million. For thresholds over that, um,
there's a minimum weighting of economic benefit that's required and,
uh, the criteria moving forward to really help drive, um, those
changes. But more broadly than that, we, um, have also
been thinking about, um, the importance of,
um,
ease of doing business with government too.
So within the rules, we've reduced from 74 down to
47, and the areas that we really thought about within that
was, is there duplication in other areas of
legislation or policy or whatever else?
So tried to really consolidate that down.
Um, we're doing a lot more work in terms of
supplier relationship management too and engaging with business.
So as you'll be aware, Business New Zealand, um,
um, helped with our launch of the rules and that was, uh, very good.
I'm spending as much time as I can on the road going out talking with
suppliers, large and small-
Mm-hmm.
... um, within the regions, um, et cetera too, so there's a very big
engagement piece that's really important to us.
So I think coming back to the overarching question-
Mm-hmm.
... is there's probably a lot of
bureaucracy still in how procurement can be run or has been
run, and we want to try and strip that out to really simplify
things. I think
with the changes from broader outcomes to economic
benefit, economic benefit still thinks
about, um, equity too,
right? So not just about sort of equality, but the equity piece is really
important too 'cause what we know and what I hear consistently from
suppliers is around the barriers to do business with
government and some of that process involved at the front end, so a really big
focus on that. Um, and there's other things within that too, like,
um, government agencies can no longer say you must have had a contract with
government previously in order to do that, so we a- absolutely recognize the
importance for startups and innovation.
Mm-hmm.
More broadly on my agenda in terms of, uh, procurement
reform is how we think about
what we call, um, collaborative contracts or all-of-government
contracts moving forward.
Mm-hmm.
So when they were originally put in place, it was very much around how
do we bring cost down? How do we get efficiency
across government agencies to be doing the same thing?
Some agencies did it well, some agencies not so well.
Uh, that's gone on a really, uh, positive path.
There's about 175 million per annum in, um,
all-of-government saving benefits estimated-
Right.
... um, at the moment. But as we
move into the new world and as we think about what do services look like
moving forward, we have to go from a commodity-based way of
thinking-
Mm-hmm.
... to a service way based of thinking, and that's the challenge in front of
us-
Mm-hmm.
... of what do we keep these contracts for whether it's tables,
whatever else it might be, versus services which is very
dependent on, um, the outcome that the
agency that is purchasing, um, needs and then that can
be absolutely scalable, um, as well as, uh, the region
or whoever they're buying it off.
Can I start by Mike? So, um, could you just give us any examples of what you might
mean by some of those services and, and how that might look in the
future?
Yeah, very good. Um, so, um, as an
example, if you, um,
had a business in Napier,
and you wanted to, uh, purchase of the recruitment
panel, um, you could go out and, um, use
a broad range of, uh, panels, but, um, what would encourage as
well, there'll be local suppliers within Napier that absolutely understand
that recruitment market and the type of people that are in the market and
absolutely working with that kind of provider.
Um, equally too, um,
often some of the panels are made up with a view that it's based
on what the 70% of, um, what agencies ought to
buy, but reality is where you've got that 30% differential, that 30%
has actually got good reasons to be doing things quite differently because of the
very nature of the, um-
Yeah.
Mm-hmm. ... communities that they serve-
Mm-hmm.
... um, or the outcomes that they want to achieve.
Okay. Uh, Reuben Davidson.
Thank you. Um,
there's a sense, and, and it's been expressed by, um, Richard Ester,
for example, Professor of Physics at the University of Auckland, this is in
relation to the Marsden Fund-
(laughs)
... um, that the science reforms provide a lack of clarity on
how discovery-led research, um, like the Marsden Fund will be
supported. Um,
do you agree with that statement, that there's a lack of clarity on that?
Uh, no, I don't agree. So we, uh, the Marsden Fund will be transferred to
MB the end of next year to administer and ru- um,
Research Funding New Zealand will become the new decision maker.
And there's, there'll be a basic research fund that continues until a decision
is taken in the future. That can always be changed, but that's the intention right
now.
Sure. And what are the, um, what are the steps you've taken or what are you
putting in place to monitor the impact of those reforms on long-term scientific
capability?
I mean, th- I think overall the, the impact of
research is something that we want to increase our, um,
understanding and evaluation of, that, uh, you know, we
are, our systems are very good at monitoring, um, the contracts and
delivery of the contracts. Um, we don't have all the systems in place
to systematically track impact after the end of the contract, uh,
so the overall evaluation is actually an area that we want to
increase. Um, we're currently doing an evaluation of the Endeavor Fund,
sort of looking at, um, past, uh, history over the last decade, I think it
is-
Mm-hmm.
... um, to using a similar methodology to Australia to understand the impact
of that. But overall, I would say that is an area that we want to increase our
focus on over time. And through these reforms, absolutely, we're gonna want to
understand, um, uh, you know, the impact of those.
Uh, just one other further thought on the Marsden.
Um, you know, the minister has been very clear that this is about,
um, shifting the balance of, uh, spend.
It's not about, um, reduce or stopping our basic research.
Mm-hmm.
And has there been any indication of further changes to
what's
in the Marsden Fund-
So in terms of-
... resource-wise for the next 12 to 24 months?
Yeah. So the, um, one part of the reforms is the
Prime Minister's Science, Innovation and Technology Advisory Council, uh, that was
established earlier this year. And the, uh, role of that,
um, council is to, uh, advise on
priorities and how they should shift over time.
And so, they've been working through, uh, this year.
Um, they've, uh, just finalized their report to the minister and the, and the Prime
Minister. Um, they will be taking that into account in, in
any further shifts to the system. Um, and what we're envisaging is that around
budget time next year, um, we'll be able to
be, um, having a much clearer forward path for all of the different
funds, um,
uh, under the new, um, f- funding structure.
We're looking at, uh, replacing the current fund-by-fund approach with something
that's much more thematic across, you know, the economy, technology, um, health and
so on. Uh, and to have a much more clearer forward-looking plan.
And that's to be around budget time next year.
But, but no indication at this point in, whether it's in its current form
or in
same fund by a different name or similar fund by a different name, that that's
gonna continue to reduce what's available in the Marsden Fund or equivalent?
There, there's no decision at the moment to, um, to change that, but it is
subject to this process that's currently underway.
Yeah. So the next round is about to open, um, and it'll be run very
similar to last round through the Marsden Fund Council.
Okay.
Thank you.
Uh, David Wilson.
Mm-hmm. Um, thank you, Chair. Look, really applaud,
um, or thank you for your colleague, um, Dr.
Campbell, on answering the questions around AI platform and, um,
the PhD proposal. And I noticed with interest
that the domains that they're focusing on as in energy and,
um, AI. Uh, so another leg to the
stool is the recent development of Invest New Zealand-
Mm-hmm.
... uh, spinout from NZTE and two of their key
foci just happen to be sustainable energy and data centers.
Fantastic.
Um, this is actually a performance question because, um,
it's my understanding that, um, you're pushing on an open door there in terms
of inward investment. Um, investors are falling over themselves to
find safe places that have sustainable energy to put data
centers. So, um, I'm hoping you're going to tell
me that it's not just going to be process measures here, we're going to get some
outcome measures of deals done.
(laughs)
I mean that is-
... that is absolutely the intention.
(laughs)
Um, and you know, the, the board, uh, is only just getting
itself, um, underway. There's been an establishment board.
The, the permanent board, um, is, is still to be put in
place, but they will be working out what is a, uh, what are those performance
measures. The minister's certainly, um, talking about wanting to, you know, have
some kind of performance measures overall.
So absolutely, that will be a, a focus and we'll...
And as the monitor, that's the thing that we'll be continuing to focus on.
Thank you.
All right. Reuben Davidson, yeah.
Um,
there's a note in the, um,
Science Advisory Group report around strengthening global partnerships and
envoys. So guess as a opening question, what progress
has been made towards establishing those science
envoys?
To probably the main, I'll ask Ian to add, um, on this.
Uh, the, you know, the main area that we use to, to build our sci- international
partnerships is through the Catalyst Fund.
Mm-hmm.
Um, which, uh, um, is, is
a, you know, has a number of different collaborations.
I think it was 53 million allocated in the '24/'25
year. Um, and so that is country-to-country, uh,
relationships. Um, so that is our primary focus.
Obviously, in the remainder of the funds, we always do look for,
uh, international collaborations.
Um, and then there's also the Horizon Europe, uh, development,
which is allows our researchers to access into Horizon
Europe with partnerships. So that's not the envoys per se, but those are a
number of, um, features of our system to encourage international collaboration.
Okay.
And, um, we haven't done any work on envoys per se.
Um, that was in the SAG report. Uh, we are anticipating that the Prime
Minister's Council will be looking at our internationalization strategy next
year. And as part of that, it would consider the envoy proposal.
Yeah. And kind of related, an activity that we have been funding is
sending, uh, groups of researchers in particular fields
to Europe to build connections to help them engage with Horizon
Europe. For example, there was one led by Victoria University on synthetic
biology. So there's been a, a couple of those sort of missions where we're getting
researchers to connect with international researchers to create those
opportunities.
Sure. So have any of the, um-
... trade missions in this term of government had science innovation
representation. So-
Yes. ... what does that look like?
Yes, I think probably all of them have, actually.
Um, uh, um-
Certainly, I know the Japan one, there was, um, representation from G-
G&S, uh, Science as part of that. Ge- um, geothermal's obviously a
big, um, interest of a number of countries. So, that's, that's one specific.
And bio-economy, I think both, I think to Japan and also to India, I
think, as well. Uh, we can probably get you those details, but,
Yeah, that'd be great.
... Mark Parker, the acting CE, is, uh, regularly offshore on trade
missions. Just coming back to Horizon Europe, we do
have, uh, key contact points. Um, they're not quite envoys,
uh, to, to the heart of your question, but they are contact points
(clears throat) to allow us to connect with the European science system.
So they act as a conduit, uh, between our system and theirs, to try and
build better connections.
Yeah.
Okay, so, uh, you have more questions in that part?
I've got one more question.
Yes, go on.
Um,
I guess
there's a lot of change happening across, you know, with, with the restructure and
with funding moving around. Um, how are you
measuring the success of, of that, that
organizational, organizational change beyond
cost? What... H- how are you measuring the success as far as the
retention of workforce, to, to earlier questions around that, as to the
overall shape and health of the sector?
Mm-hmm.
What, what systems have you got in place to track that?
We're still putting (clears throat) , excuse me, we're s- still putting some of
those systems in place. Um, the, the focus has been, and will
be, uh, on broader impact, and Nick has already talked
about, um, we're, we're quite honest that actually we need to be doing much better
evaluative, uh, work on the impact of the science.
Um, within impact generally, which is a very broad area, obviously we want all
science to have impact. Um, uh, commercialization is, uh, a key feature
of these reforms, so we'll be, we're ex- we are discussing with the PROs
right now what those targets should sensibly be, uh,
as a key focus here.
But that, that assessment criteria's still in flux, or it's still in
development?
Yeah, still in development, yeah.
What's the timeframe on that?
Um, I would imagine the next couple of months.
I think they feed into the accountability cycle next year, yeah.
And beyond commercial success-
So-
... what else, what are your other, what is-
Yeah, c- collaboration, I think, is, um, is, is absolutely key.
Uh, having a more effective system, uh, not just a more efficient one.
Now, how you measure collaboration is actually quite difficult.
Um, but what we have seen through the merger process is a
(clears throat) , um... I step back a
bit. The, the CRIs were established as
standalone companies. Uh, oh, I don't even, probably
20 years ago. Um-
30 years.
(laughs) Yeah.
Yeah,
Almost 30.
And, um, at the, at the heart of that is a, is a, is a, an
accountability on the directors of that company to act in the best interests of
that single company.
Mm-hmm.
What we are moving to, uh, with the legislation is a requirement that,
actually, they need to take consideration of the broader system
impact. And that the c- that the shareholder, the Crown, can
expect them to act in the interests of the shareholder,
which might not be in the interest of that particular company.
Uh, so that's a key feature. In advance of that,
the new, uh, boards, uh, uh, in place are already
working collectively in a way we have not seen in decades.
Uh, particularly, uh, starting to think about, uh,
common back office systems-
Mm-hmm.
... uh, common investments into infrastructure, uh, like science, scientific
kit. Uh, and they are starting, in very early days, um,
how can they join up on property as well? So, we're...
So culturally, we're seeing, uh, just the sorts of changes that we want.
How you measure that, uh, is a little difficult.
Mm-hmm.
And do you wanna stress, you know, 'cause you started with cost and what else, you
know, we're certainly seeing it as effectiveness is the, is the primary driver, a
better performing system, and then efficiency second.
Yes, we will expect some efficiency gains, but that's not the primary driver.
It is the better outcome.
Yeah.
Okay.
So, members, you're happy to move to the next, which is basically open,
uh, opportunity to ask-
Yeah. ... any questions that we could not cover in...
But they still need, um-
(laughs) ... the questions should be about annual performance.
Yeah. (laughs)
(laughs) (laughs)
I'll just add that-
(laughs)
You said open questions? So-
(laughs) (laughs) ... open are those.
(laughs) Yeah, all right. I mean, um-
Yeah.
Are there any other members?
Thank you. Um, just a question on, um,
iPhones and the, uh, intellectual property functions that MB
has. Um, very helpfully, MB provided to this committee a briefing
on intellectual property, um, at our, um,
request. Um, and then a week
after that, um, had a bill introduced, um, to
the Parliament, which was about something, uh, you know, within that subject
matter, but not, not flagged with the committee.
And I just wanted to give an opportunity for MB to sort of explain to us what the
process is for, um, you know, as- assisting
a select committee of Parliament with understanding what work MB had
on, um, in these subject matters. Um,
you know, we are h- trying to build consensus in this room.
Mm-hmm.
And so, we do rely on the public service to help us understand
what, what work is, it is undertaking.
Did... I, I assume that the, the-
It's the patent, Patents Amendment Bill-
Yeah.
... that she was talking about.
Sorry, the-
She's talking about the Patents Amendment Bill-
I was gonna say, I was-
Yes, yeah, yeah. ... I assumed that was the, the, the bill that you were talking about.
That's what I guessed,
Um, and as you know, that was a, uh, the application of the current
law to dated, uh, patent applications.
And one had been floating around for a long time, uh, where some
participants in the market were concerned that actually they were having an unfair
disadvantage-
Mm-hmm.
... because they hadn't yet applied.
I think, um, what, to your substantive point though, is, you know, how can we,
uh, help-
... the Parliament and the committees to—to see what's coming forward.
Um, we will always try to do that, uh, but it obviously sits with, uh, the
executive, uh, as to how they want to manage the—the
legislative program, um, and when and how they want to inform the
House about when things are going to come forward.
So, where we are empowered to do so, we will obviously, you know, give you a
forward look. We won't always know because legislation comes on the
books sometimes if an urgent item is being addressed, uh, or there
might be times where ministers, you know, have not yet made a decision.
But where we can, we—we will give you a forward look.
Okay. Um-
Can we?
Do you... Uh, on the product safety questions that I raised, I
really, um, want to thank the team for the way that, um, you all
engaged in that. That was-
Thank you. ... a really helpful discussion. Um, it's not something that will
often, um, be subject of a, sort of c- select committee's
focus-
Mm-hmm.
... um, and we don't have other opportunities probably other than annual review to
really dive into that. Um, so probably the next opportunity to come back
to that issue will be next year. Um, but I'm not sure that's the best way of
handling that. I-I wonder if, um, you have some observations for us about how we
might ensure that, uh, the parliamentary focus, where there is a
really strong consumer focus on something like this, um, you know,
remains in a sort of open, uh, back and forth
between the parliamentary wing and the public service?
Mm.
Well, I think it's a- always open to committees-
Yeah. ... to, uh, invite-
Yeah.
... uh, the public service to come and have briefings and s-
... sessions out of—out of the legislative cycle and out of the annual review and
estimate cycle.
So-
And we'd welcome that.
... that sits with the committee, I think.
Yeah.
For example, there was recently a, um, one on the AI, um,
business, uh, um, business guidance.
So th- those are the sorts of things-
Yeah.
Yeah. ... that, you know, we're-we're happy to-
And that was really useful.
... take part in.
Yeah. Yeah. All right, members looks like, um...
But there might be more questions.
You will get inviting later on, um, if there will be any from the committee
members. Can I... But can I thank you for your time today?
It's been really useful. Thank you so much.
And if we don't see you before Christmas, uh, wishing you all a very merry
Christmas.
Thank you.
Thank you very, very much
too.